this is lada maths I'm Kyle Adam and
today we're talking about perfect
numbers and no I don't mean perfect tens
of a diving board or perfect scores on
an exam I'm talking about perfect
numbers so what do we mean by perfect
numbers well let's have a look at the
number six which is our first perfect
number what is it about six the mix of
so perfect
well it's something to do with the
factors or divisors of six these are the
numbers that go into six exactly so
we've got one two three and six and if
we discount the number itself we call
these the proper divisors so we get rid
of that and we're left with the device
is one two and three add them together
and what do we have we get six which is
the number we started with and this is
exactly what we call a perfect number in
maths let's have a look at our next
perfect number which is 28 again it's to
do with the proper divisors of 28 so
that's one two four seven and fourteen
add these all together and hey presto
what do you get 28 again so what's the
big deal they seem pretty common we've
got six and 28 a couple of fairly low
numbers what makes them so special well
the thing is if you call something
perfect it's probably quite rare and in
maths the same thing applies here even
though we've got our two first perfect
numbers are very low the next two in
order are 496 and 8120 eight so it's
quite tricky to find them in general and
in fact with only today found 50 of
these perfect numbers we don't know
forever going to find any more and we
still don't know yet whether that
actually is an odd perfect number
however we have checked every single odd
number with up to 1,500 digits so it's
looking very unlikely and if you want to
find one you're gonna have to stop
looking from there so for now all we
have is these fifty even perfect numbers
and now I'm going to find that what
makes them even more special even more
perfect and why the prime suspects have
something to do with it now remember a
prime number is one that has exactly two
factors it's only divisible by 1 and
itself and we know an awful lot about
primes mainly because they are the
building blocks of the mathematical
world and there was a particularly
interesting piece of work done by a
French monk in the 17th century that
chapter is called Marin Mersenne and we
now give his name to a special type of
prime number so a Mersenne prime is a
prime number that can be written as 1
less than a power of 2 so that means it
has the form 2 to the power of n minus 1
where n is also some prime number to get
a better idea of what these Mersenne
primes with life let's take a look at
the first few examples so for each of
our first few problems we're going to
work out this formula and see what that
gives us so we've got our first prime is
2 2 to the power of 2 minus 1 2 squared
minus 1 that's 4 minus 1 which is 3 & 3
is a prime number so there we have it
our first Mersenne prime now 2 to the
power of 3 minus 1 that's 8 minus 1
which is 7 that's also prime number
sense is looking good so far to the
power of 5 is 32 minus 1 is 31 which is
also prime and 2 to the power of 7 is
128 with a bit more brain power minus 1
and that's 127 which is in fact also
prime so it's looking quite good is
looking so far that every prime number
is giving us a special one of these
Mersenne primes however we get to the
next one a lot and unfortunately it
breaks down there to the power of 11 is
2048 minus one to get 2047 and
unfortunately this number is divisible
by 23 so it's in fact not a prime number
so far we only managed to find 50 of
these Mersenne primes and if that
numbers unfamiliar then hold on to that
thought this seems a bit strange because
these prime numbers we've known since
ancient Greek times that there are
infinitely many of the prime numbers but
we still don't know for sure whether or
not there are infinitely many of these
Mersenne Prime's one benefit of these
Mersenne Prime's however is that among
the prime numbers they tend to be pretty
big so there's an ongoing competition in
the math community to try and find the
largest prime number that they can and
so far the largest ones has been found
is a ridiculous big Mersenne prime in
fact is written like this it's 2 to the
power of 77
million until one has 17-1 so it's an
absolutely joined Norma's number has
over 23 million digits which are
calculated if you write each digit the
size of a grain of rice it would take
you absolutely ages to write it so now
on to the link between perfect numbers
and Mersenne primes so suppose we have a
prime number n that gives us a Mersenne
prime so they're the ancient Greek
mathematician Euclid proved that
something quite amazing happens when you
multiply its Mersenne prime by this
value here 2 to the power of n minus 1
so let's give it a go 2 minus 1 is 1
2 to the power 1 well anything to the
power of 1 is just itself so we get 2
now 3 minus 1 is 2 2 squared gives us 4
5 minus 1 is 4 to the power 4 gives us
16 and 7 minus 1 is 6 and 2 to the power
6 is 64 so as you can told us let's give
this a go let's multiply these two
numbers together 3 times 2 obviously is
6 7 times 4 is 28 or when he started to
look a little bit familiar
we've got 31 times 16 is 496 and with a
bit more brain power we get 127 times 64
is 8,000 128 hopefully you will have
noticed by now that these are in fact
the first four perfect numbers so what
you can show is that if you have any
Mersenne prime here you can multiply it
by this value and you get a perfect
number then over 2,000 years later the
legendary swiss mathematician Leonhard
Euler came along and fruit then the
other way round is also true so whenever
we have an even perfect number down here
we also have a corresponding Mersenne
prime from this formula so that means
that if we continue this table on
forever we get exactly the same number
of Mersenne Prime's and even perfect
numbers and since we said earlier there
probably aren't any odd perfect numbers
this means there's a one-to-one
correspondence between these two
special numbers now this is quite
shortly because we define perfect
numbers simply as a cool number that has
this neat little property about the sum
of its factors but actually it tells us
something quite deep and something quite
meaningful about the distribution of
certain types of prime numbers so you
can open up a whole new avenue of
exploration in mathematics so there we
have it we've seen perfect numbers we've
seen Mersenne primes and we've seen a
connection between the two over two
thousand years apart now we've only
found 50 of these Mersenne primes so far
and that means we have fifty perfect
numbers and we still don't know for sure
whether we're going to find any more of
them now unfortunately most of these
perfect numbers are a bit too big to be
on your lottery ticket or to fit on the
backi foot pusher so they might not ever
be your favorite numbers but they'll
always hold a special place in the heart
of math
you